[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard,
and this is Mystery Teachings.
Who are we?
What are we made of?
And why are we here?
In this episode, we dig
deeper into how consciousness
works through the fundamental
components of our universe
to fulfill a purpose.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In ancient times,
everything in the universe
was believed to be made of five
elements, earth, water, air,
fire, and ether, also
referred to as void.
Some variation of these
five classical elements
was found in every
culture of antiquity.
The universe was
relatively simple.
Then with the
scientific revolution
through various chemistry
and physics experiments,
scientists discovered atoms.
They concluded that the universe
is not so simple after all,
and it's actually composed
of over 100 different types
of elements.
But of these elements,
only two of them
make up the majority
of visible matter
in the universe,
which is about 75%
hydrogen and 25% helium,
the two lightest elements.
All the heavier
elements, which are
made in the alchemical furnaces
of stars and supernovae,
comprise only a small fraction
of a percent of our universe.
And yet, many of these
elements are vital for life
as we know it.
What about us?
What are we made of?
We often hear the saying
that we are made of stardust,
and it's true.
Our bodies are
comprised primarily
of the four elements of life,
oxygen, carbon, hydrogen,
and nitrogen, with small
amounts of calcium, phosphorus,
potassium, and a
few other elements.
About 90% of what
we are made of came
from the stars that exploded
billions of years ago.
Can you feel that
connection to the stars?
In the last 100 or
so years, scientists
have searched even deeper into
the fundamental building blocks
to discover the subatomic world.
Through the quantum revolution,
the standard model of physics
was developed,
giving us an array
of 17 elementary particles
plus their antiparticles.
These include 12 fermions,
the building blocks
of ordinary matter, which
include six types of quarks
and six types of leptons.
In addition, there
are five bosons,
which are the force carriers
that mediate interactions
between the particles.
These particles
are characterized
by their type,
mass, charge, spin,
and quantum flavor or color.
But as physicists began
smashing particles together
at higher and higher
energies, they
discovered more
strange particles,
and things became
confusing again.
Around the same time came
quantum field theory,
which said that the
universe is made of fields
rather than particles.
These fields vibrate at
different frequencies
to produce the different
particles and forces.
In their lowest energy
state, these fields
have a zero-point
energy, which is not zero
due to quantum fluctuations
from the uncertainty principle.
This reintroduced the
concept of the ether back in.
Now, physicists didn't
really like that,
because it brought infinities
into their calculations.
So they tried to ignore it with
a mathematical trick called
renormalization.
Now, in the last few decades,
various string theories
have taken this concept
of vibrating fields
to a whole new level.
They introduced the
idea of hyperspace, a 10
or 11 dimensional
space where everything
becomes like musical
notes on a cosmic violin
string or membrane.
It's a rather elegant
and beautiful way
to think of our universe.
It reminds me of the
ancient Pythagorean
and Egyptian mystery
school teachings
on the laws of harmony,
music, and sacred geometry
that said that everything
in nature and the cosmos
follows these laws.
Our universe is a
cosmic symphony playing
the music of the spheres.
And according to
string theories,
this is likely true at the
quantum levels as well.
We also learned that in
the last few decades,
scientists have discovered
that our universe is
composed of much stranger
things than we ever realized.
Current models now focus
on three components
that make up our universe,
visible matter, dark matter,
and dark energy.
Everything described
in the standard model
of physics and
the periodic chart
are what make up
the visible matter.
But this only amounts
to 5% of our universe,
while dark matter makes
up 27%, and dark energy,
the intrinsic energy
of the vacuum,
makes up the other
68% of our universe.
Yet science today is so
focused on just physical causes
and effects that they
neglect or even deny
that there might be anything
beyond the physical.
Are we just products
of physics, chemistry,
biology, and psychology?
Or are we more than that?
What about soul and spirit?
Do they exist?
Do they persist
after the body dies?
If so, what are they?
The Kabbalistic Tree
of Life has a pattern
that can be applied fractally
at many scales, including to who
and what we are.
On the Tree of Life,
the physical round
is only the very
bottom of the tree,
and there are many
dimensions and planes
of higher frequency beyond
what our physical senses
and detectors can measure.
Kabbalistically, the
same source energy
of Ein Sof that flows
through the universe
also flows through us.
We could equate that
essence to our spirit,
which is everywhere,
infinite, and eternal.
In all ancient mystery
school traditions,
soul and spirit are
two distinct things.
How are they different?
Let's define spirit as the
eternal essence that comes
from source and is one with it.
In this oneness
state, spirit is often
assigned to the top
of the Tree of Life.
Vibrationally speaking,
it is the opposite end
of the spectrum
from the physical.
The hermetic
principle of polarity
says everything is dual.
Everything has poles.
Everything has its
pair of opposites.
But it also says that
spirit and matter
are but two poles of the same
thing, the intermediate planes
being merely degrees
of vibration.
This relates to
Einstein's equation,
e equals mc squared,
which says that energy,
or spirit, and matter can be
transformed into one another.
Only in this case, spirit
is at such a high frequency
that we don't yet know how to
physically detect it directly.
What then is soul?
Well, soul encompasses
all the levels
in between the top and the
bottom of the Tree of Life.
Soul is a mediator that
bridges and communicates
between spirit and body.
It includes the
functions of the mind.
It allows us to become conscious
of this physical experience.
It also contains our
individuality and personality.
We could apply a modern analogy
of a radio transmission.
Spirit is like the broadcaster.
Soul is all the radio signals
that carry information
at different
frequencies or stations,
while body is the hardware that
receives the signals depending
on where the dial is set.
Various alchemical traditions
from both East and West
talked about three essentials.
These are the same as
spirit, soul, and body.
In Western alchemy, they
called them philosophical
mercury, sulfur, and
salt. Paracelsus,
the great alchemist,
initiate, and father
of modern pharmacology,
said this.
"The soul unites the two
contraries, body and spirit,
and changes them
into one essence."
If we put these three essentials
into a more modern terminology,
we could call them energy,
consciousness, and matter.
But as suggested by
physicist David Bohm,
perhaps all energy,
consciousness, and matter
are emergent from
an implicate order.
They are really one thing.
Perhaps as string
theories are proposing,
all things are just
different vibrations
plucked on the strings
of a cosmic symphony.
Indeed, in alchemy, Kabbalah,
and other mystical traditions,
all these forces
and elements derive
from two primary generators.
Alchemy calls it the
fixed and the volatile.
Kabbalah calls it
form and force,
or feminine and masculine.
Taoism calls it yin and yang.
Science calls it
expansion and contraction.
Yet these two
generators, in turn,
come from the one, the prima.
And while it is true
that all is one,
when it comes to this level
of density that we live in,
isn't that kind
of oversimplifying
what life is about?
Why are we here?
Why did all of this come to be?
What's the purpose of it?
Is there a purpose?
The alchemical
tradition would say
that we are here
to master the art
and science of transformation
and raising vibration,
that we are here to learn to
harness the power of the three
essentials, purify them,
harmonize them, and then bring
them together into a
perfected form, also called
the philosopher's stone.
Kabbalah has a similar idea,
but it is more specifically
focused on the raising
of our own soul
up to higher planes
of spirit and uniting
with our divine source.
Simultaneously, we are
also here to embody spirit
into the physical body
and thereby elevate
the vibration of the physical.
Another way this is talked about
is creating heaven on Earth.
Now, as a Kabbalist
goes through the cycles
of this spiritual alchemy,
raising up to spirit
and then bringing spirit
back down into body
through the mediating
vehicle of the soul,
we ultimately become what
is called the Adam Kadmon,
or the perfected godlike human.
Many ancient mystery
school traditions
of different lineages
have similar teachings
and employ a variety
of methods to help
us achieve such evolution
and transformation.
Are these just mystical
teachings to give us
some sense of meaning,
purpose, and comfort in life?
Or could there really
be something to it?
Are there any clues that
we can gain from science
to confirm any of this?
Actually, yes, there is.
They call our universe
the Goldilocks universe,
because its conditions
are just right
for life and consciousness
to thrive in it.
How so?
To begin with, there are over
20 fundamental constants that
are perfectly tuned for life.
These include things like
the mass of particles,
the strength of the four
forces, the speed of light,
the energy density of
our universe, and so on.
All these values lie
within a very narrow range
of what makes life and the
universe we know possible.
If just one of those numbers
was tuned a little off-key
and fell outside
that narrow range,
then our universe
might not exist.
Stars would never
have developed.
Atomic elements would not
have fused or bound together.
The universe could
have flown apart.
Earth might have been flipped
over or frozen too fast.
DNA would never have had a
chance to form, and life as we
know it would be impossible.
Not only is our universe
in the Goldilocks zones,
but so is our Earth.
Earth sits at the just
right distance from the sun
to allow for liquid water.
It has the just right weight
and gravitational field
to hold the
atmosphere we breathe.
Any smaller, and it would
not hold oxygen. Any larger,
it would be too
poisonous for us.
Earth also has the just right
amount of oceans, temperature,
plate tectonics,
tilt of its axis,
and so on needed to
host intelligent life.
Not only that, but the
moon is the just right size
to stabilize Earth's
orbit, preventing it
from having too many
cataclysmic changes.
And the moon is also the perfect
relative size and distance
from the Earth to be able
to fully eclipse the sun,
even though the sun is
massive by comparison.
Equally important is the
presence, position, and size
of Jupiter.
Due to its large
gravity field, Jupiter
has cleaned out our solar
system from asteroids and space
debris.
Jupiter acted like Earth's
benevolent protector,
helping prevent many
asteroids from hitting it.
Not only is Earth in
the Goldilocks zone
of our solar system,
but it also resides
at the just right distance
from the center of our galaxy.
We are about 2/3 of the
way out from a black hole
at the center of the Milky Way.
If we were much closer,
we'd be scorched
by the intense radiation
that surrounds the center,
but much farther, and we'd
lack the higher elements
necessary to sustain life.
As physicist Freeman
Dyson once put it,
"It's as if the universe
knew we were coming."
Could this mean that
there is intelligence
behind this universe?
Or is it just a lucky string
of random coincidences?
The idea that the
universe was designed
for life and consciousness
according to some grand plan
is what scientists call the
strong anthropic principle,
while the weak anthropic
principle simply acknowledges
the fine-tuning
towards life but says
that it is by the laws of
nature rather than by design.
Then, of course, there is the
materialist atheistic view
that dismisses the anthropic
principle altogether,
calling it mystical mumbo jumbo.
But the only explanation
the materialists
have been able to come up with
for the overwhelming amount
of lucky coincidences
is that our universe
must be just one of a
vast number of universes
in the multiverse.
In the multiverse,
they say there
will be all possible
tunings of universes,
so the fact that our
universe is tuned for life
is not significant.
But the multiverse ideas are
not sufficient to explain away
the existence of
universal consciousness
or intelligent source.
Not only does it appear that the
physical laws of our universe
are finely tuned as if by
design, but the very substance
of physicality itself
seems more like ideas
than solid particles.
As Werner Heisenberg, one of the
founders of quantum mechanics,
said, "The smallest
units of matter
are, in fact, not
physical objects.
They are ideas."
Another Nobel Prize
winning scientist
who actually started his
career as a materialist
and then later changed his
view is Harvard professor
of biology George Wald.
The results of his research
brought him to the conclusion
that "mind has existed always
as the matrix; the source
and condition of
physical reality.
The stuff of which physical
reality is composed
is mind-stuff."
Then he hints at
a purpose for it
all by saying, "It is
mind that has composed
a physical universe
that breeds life and so
eventually evolves creatures
that know and create.
In them the universe
begins to know itself."
What does all this point to?
That mind or intelligence
source is the architect
of all existence,
while matter and life
are the intentional result
from the ideas expressed
by that mind.
This is aligned with that
first hermetic principle
that says, "The all is mind.
The universe is mental.
All the phenomenal
world or universe
is simply a mental creation."
The real question is, how
does this mind create,
by what mechanism?
We've explored how all forms and
forces emerge as fluctuations
from the quantum sea and how
through the observer effect,
we can collapse the waveform
to manifest things out
of the quantum sea.
Today's standard
model of physics
describes these forms and
forces as fermions and bosons.
Fermions include all particles
of ordinary matter like quarks,
electrons, neutrinos,
protons, and so forth,
while bosons are the
force carriers that
mediate interactions via
the four physical forces.
How does it work?
It all begins in
the quantum sea,
which holds all memory,
information, and potentials
of what can come
to be, while mind,
eternal source, or
universal consciousness
directs the creative forces.
Before the beginning,
all potentials,
everything that
could come to be,
was already there as potential.
These potentials
were just latent.
They weren't activated.
In mystery school
Kabbalah, we say
that before the
moment of let there
be light and the big bang,
everything was in darkness.
It was all there
already as potentials,
but the lights were out.
It was as if things were asleep.
Imagine walking into an
unexplored pitch-black room.
We can be aware and sense
that things are there,
but do we know what they are?
No, we don't.
In order to really
know what they are,
we must turn on the lights.
Similarly, the mind of Ein
Sof went into the darkness
and sensed all these potentials.
It's kind of like
how in our own mind
we can sense in the
unexpressed depths of our being
that there is a latent
potential within.
In sensing, we become aware.
Sentience, the ability to sense
and interact, is universal.
It is found at all scales, from
the macrocosm to the microcosm,
even down to the quantum level.
Sentience is the
foundation of awareness,
and it is an essential
aspect of mind.
What follows awareness?
Well, once we become
aware that something
is there, what comes next?
It's the will to know, to awaken
and express that potential.
As the will or
desire bubbles up,
a vibration ripples
through the quantum sea.
What is this bubbling
up, this ripple?
It's that first pause, the
fluctuation in the quantum
vacuum that initiated the big
bang, the will of Ein Sof,
the infinite intelligence
source, the first observer
moved upon the quantum sea
or the waters of the deep.
This will then
activates something.
What does it activate?
First, it activates
consciousness.
Second, it activates a force.
Now, what do we mean
by consciousness here?
How is it different
from awareness?
It's kind of like
when we're just
starting to wake up from sleep.
We begin coming to awareness,
but our eyes are closed
and it is still dark.
We sense things.
We become aware of ourself
and our environment,
but we're not fully
awake and moving yet.
As we start to move, we open
our eyes and become conscious.
Consciousness is that coming
into awareness of something
that is already there.
Consciousness
observes more actively
and directly than awareness.
Consciousness can also direct
the will to do something,
like turn on the lights.
But directing the will
implies something else.
It implies that there is a
thought or intent behind it,
such as let there be light.
Now, how does this
intention get carried out?
Well, it requires
a force, and forces
are mediated through bosons,
so bosons were activated.
And these bosons, or
forces, are sent out,
and it causes the
lights to turn on.
What happens when
the lights turn on?
It wakes up all those
potentials that were
lying dormant in the darkness.
We were also one of
those potentials.
We had to be.
Otherwise, we couldn't
have come to be.
But by saying we,
what do I mean?
What are we?
We are energy.
Everything is energy.
But what is energy?
Well, energy is eternal.
One of the laws of physics
says energy cannot be created
or destroyed.
It can only be transformed.
This means energy
is eternal essence.
In metaphysical terms, we call
our eternal essence our spirit.
We are eternal beings.
We have never been born, and
therefore we can never die.
This is one of the core concepts
of mystery school teachings.
And in that spirit
essence, we are all one.
So in saying we, we're not
just talking about us humans.
We're talking about the
universe and all its forms.
We are all one.
When the lights
turned on, our spirit
woke up and opened its eyes.
Our consciousness
became activated.
We looked around
and witnessed what
was happening, the
cosmos beginning
to be created by Ein Sof.
What happened when we saw this?
It stimulated a thought
in our consciousness.
What thought?
We thought, create me.
I want to be created,
meaning I want to live.
I want to be a part
of this creation
in the physical universe.
And with our thought, we
reached out to Ein Sof
and we shouted, create me.
In doing so, we
activated another force.
And that force
kicked off a cascade
of events that adjusted
the tuning of the universe
so that we could be.
What does this mean?
While Ein Sof's will is
what initiated the big bang
and the creation
of this universe,
could it be that it
was our will that
initiated its
fine-tuning, which is what
allows for physical forms,
life, and intelligent beings
to evolve?
If so, then that means
our thought eventually
led to matter being generated.
Thoughts create matter, and
matter is made of fermions.
But it's not just any thought.
It must be coherent thought
from higher consciousness, which
is why it's a lot more
challenging to do this
from the level of
consciousness most people
are operating at today.
But given all of
this, it helps explain
why the Three
Initiates, in writing
about the principle
of mentalism,
said that "This
principle explains
the true nature of
energy, power, and matter,
and why and how all of these
are subordinate to the mastery
of mind."
This mastery is what
true mystery schools
train initiates to achieve.
So why did we think
we wanted to be a part
of this physical experience?
Is there purpose to it all?
To answer that, let's turn back
to science for another clue.
After the big bang, a myriad
of particles and forces
were ushered in from
the quantum vacuum.
As the universe expanded
and temperatures cooled,
those particles were
drawn together in order
to release excess energy.
At first, it was
matter and antimatter
that drew together and then
exploded into photons of light.
But due to there somehow being
more matter than antimatter,
another example of the
very fortunate fine-tuning
in our universe, eventually
the matter came to dominate.
At that point, different
types of particles
then needed to bond.
We often hear the saying
that in the physical,
opposites attract.
And while that is
true in some cases,
it's not the whole truth.
Quantum physics tells us that
the things that draw together
are usually of a
complementary nature.
First, protons and
neutrons are fused together
by the strong force.
Both are made of quarks
and are somewhat similar,
but they have different charges.
Next, electrons, which
are very different,
join the nuclei through electric
attraction to create atoms.
Through bonding, they
are able to create
more stable and balanced forms.
Eventually, atoms
then joined to form
molecules, molecules
combined to form DNA,
and all of it ultimately
leading to life.
What is this telling us?
It means that we are meant
to seek union or bonding
with complementary others.
Rather than seeking
our opposite or seeking
people who are just
like us, we should
seek to find the people
who complement us.
Opposites often explode
in a blaze of glory
like particles
and antiparticles.
Same same may be comfortable,
but not so stable or useful
or long-lasting on its own.
But with our complements, we can
fortify and balance each other.
We can find the synergy needed
to build towards greater life.
But why come into this
physical experience
in order to seek bonding?
Didn't we come
from unity already?
We did.
But in our original
unity, everything
was a homogeneous oneness.
There were no
distinctions and therefore
no interactions, no tension,
no progression, no alchemy.
Interaction leads to
knowledge and understanding.
We and the universe
come to know ourself
through reflection and
interaction with our lives
and with others.
Remember, even the
quarks are sentient.
At the quantum
level, interactions
are taking place all the time.
Particles exchange information
through those interactions
and then act according
to the laws of nature.
Information equals knowledge.
Each ripple, each
interaction, and its results
are recorded upon
the quantum sea.
In alchemy, there
is a formula that
rests at the core of all
transformation and progression.
It's called solve et
coagula, which means
to separate and recombine.
The idea is to successfully
harmonize and unite
different essences
in a synergistic way.
The fuel of alchemy is drawn
from the tension that arises
between different essences.
One of the goals is to
harness this tension
and harmonize the
differences, bringing them
into a perfect union.
When the philosopher's
stone is truly achieved,
then the bond will be
indestructible and based
upon eternal essence.
In today's terminology
of quantum physics,
we'd say this is about union
through complementarity.
This is the alchemy or
transformational process
taking place in our universe,
from the prima of the quantum
vacuum to the materia of our
physical world to seeking
the philosopher's
stone through alchemy,
the ultimate union of
all these shattered
pieces into a oneness that is
perfect and indestructible.
Kabbalah calls this
tikkun, or to rectify,
to heal the shattered vessels
left over after the big bang.
Each of us contains shards from
those shattered vessels within.
And our mission is to heal and
repair the pieces in ourselves,
especially within
our soul, and then
to help others do the same.
Only when we in
our diverse forms
can reclaim our wholeness, both
individually and collectively,
will we then be able to rectify
the shattering in our world.
The healing of our world
is a collective mission,
yet each of us has a unique
role to play in that mission.
The question we should
all be asking ourselves
is whether we are on track
with fulfilling our unique role
or not.
We can only answer
this for ourselves,
but clearly the world
desperately needs healing
and has a ways to go before
the vessel is repaired.
We each are responsible
for a part of that healing.
We are not here to be the
same as everyone else.
We are here to be different,
to express our uniqueness.
It often takes
quantum leaps of faith
to step onto our true path of
purpose and personal mastery.
It requires facing
challenges and feeling
the grind of the different
forces and aspects of life
that throw us into the fire,
then douse us in the water,
and then bang us around
a bit until we become
sharp and strong as a sword.
If we run from those
challenges, then we
miss the opportunity
to become stronger.
But when we face
our fears and break
through our inner
resistance to moving forward
in the direction
of our dreams, that
is what prepares us to
fulfill those dreams.
What dreams are inside you
waiting to be fulfilled?
As Henry David Thoreau
wrote, "Go confidently
in the direction of your dreams.
Live the life you've imagined."
To summarize, what's
the purpose of it all?
Three things, mind
coming to know itself,
through the expression
of all the potentials
in their myriad
forms, and finally
progression and
transformation through healing
and the alchemy of life until
we achieve our full potential
and carry out the mission
that we are here for,
both individually
and collectively.
In physics, the philosopher's
stone or holy grail
is to discover the grand
unified theory of everything,
a single equation that
unifies and derives
all phenomena in our universe.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."